.Dd March 12, 2025
.Dt TED 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ted
.Nd text editor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ted
.Op Fl c Ar COLS
.Op Fl f Cm unix | dos
.Op Fl r Ar ROWS
.Op Fl t Ar TABS
.Ar FILE
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a console-based plain-text editor.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c Ar COLS
Use COLS columns per row to display text (Default: 72).
.Pp
A newline is considered as a single character and uses a column.
.Pp
If a line wraps, then the COLS+1 column is used to display a
continuation line marker (Default: red backslash).
.It Fl f Cm unix | dos
Use unix or dos line endings as specified.
If the file contains a line ending that does not match, it is an
error (Default: unix).
.It Fl r Ar ROWS
Use ROWS rows to display text (Default: 10).
.Pp
If there is no text to display on a row, display an empty line marker
(Default: blue tilde) on that row.
.Pp
The ROWS+1 row is used to display the echo area.
.It Fl t Ar TABS
Use TABS columns per tabstop (Default: 8).
.El
.Sh KEYCHORDS
Typing letters, numbers, and special characters inserts them into the
buffer at the point.
.Pp
Commands to the editor are given by pressing keys along with
modifiers or pressing other special keys on the keybord.
Modifiers are indicated as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It C-
Control
.It M-
Meta or Alt
.It S-
Shift
.It s-
Super or Windows
.El
.Pp
Combinations of modifiers are indicated by combining the above
indicators.
For example, "C-M-a" indicates typing "a" while holding down control
and alt keys; "M-O" is the same as "M-S-o".
.Pp
Special keys such as arrow keys are indicated by enclosing the key
name within "<" and ">".
For example, "<up>" indicates the up arrow key.
.Pp
Commands are issued using sequences of keybindings called
keychords.
Many commands take a prefix argument.
The prefix argument is either a flag or a number.
To specify a flag prefix argument, type "C-u" before the keychord for
the command.
To specify a number prefix argument, type "C-u NUM" the keychord for
the command.
The FLAG argument is usually used to modify the default behaviour and
NUM argument is usually used as a repeat count.
.Pp
The command keychords are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It <down>
Move the point to the next row.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It <end>
Move the point to the end of the current row.
.It <home>
Move the point to the beginning of the current row.
.It <left>
Move the point to the previous character.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It <next>
Page down.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It <prior>
Page up.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It <right>
Move the point to the next character.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It C-<down>
Move the point a section forward.
.It C-<left>
Move the point to a word backward.
.It C-<right>
Move the point a word forward.
.It C-<space>
Set a new mark at the current point.
.It C-<up>
Move the point a section backward.
.It C-a
Move the point to the first column in the current row.
.It C-b
Move the point to the previous character.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It C-e
Move the point to the last column in the current row.
.It C-f
Move the point to the next character.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It C-g
Cancel command and/or deactivate mark.
.It C-n
Move the point to the next row.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It C-o
Insert a newline character at point.
The point will be at the newly inserted newline character after this
command.
.It C-p
Move the point to the previous row.
A NUM argument repeats the command NUM times.
.It C-q
Cancel current search.
.It C-r
Move the point to the previous search result.
.It C-s
Move the point to the next search result.
If there are no active search results, start a search.
.It C-v
Scroll up.
.It C-w
Cut or yank selected text into the kill buffer.
.It C-y
Paste text in the kill buffer.
.It C-z
Suspend the editor and return to the terminal.
The editor can be resumed using `fg'.
.It M-%
Move the point to NUM% location in the buffer.
.It M-<
Move the point to the beginning of the buffer.
.It M->
Move the point to the end of the buffer.
.It M-a
Move the point to the beginning of the current line.
.It M-b
Move the point to the beginning of the word.
.It M-e
Move the point to the end of the current line.
.It M-f
Move the point to the end of the word.
.It M-g
Go to line given as the NUM argument.
.It M-O
Open a blank line before the current line and move the point to the
beginning of the new line.
.It M-o
Open a blank line after the current line and move the point to the
beginning of the new line.
.It M-v
Scroll down.
.It M-w
Copy selected text into kill buffer.
.It S-<down>
Set mark and go to next row.
.It S-<left>
Set mark and go to previous character.
.It S-<right>
Set mark and go to next character.
.It S-<up>
Set mark and go to previous row.
.It C-M-b
Move the point to the beginning of the section.
.It C-M-f
Move the point to the end of the section.
.It C-S-<down>
Add a new mark and move the point to the end of the section.
.It C-S-<left>
Add a new mark and move the point to the beginning of the word.
.It C-S-<right>
Add a new mark and move the point to the end of the word.
.It C-S-<up>
Add a new mark and move the point to the beginning of the section.
.It C-x =
Show line and column number of point.
.It C-x C-c
Exit with status 0.
Fails if buffer is not saved.
With a FLAG argument, save buffer and quit.
.It C-x C-n
Set the current column as the goal column.
The point gravitates towards the goal column when moving across rows.
Useful for editing vertically aligned columns of text.
.Pp
With a FLAG argument, remove the goal column.
.It C-x C-s
Save the buffer to file.
.It C-x C-q
Toggle read-only mode.
.It C-x M-c
Exit with status 1.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TED_SEARCH
A command to search the buffer.
The command is called as:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<cmd> <file> <rows>
.Ed
.Pp
where <file> is a temporary file that contains the current contents of
the buffer and <rows> is the ROWS argument.
.Pp
The command should output search results as byte offsets on the
standard output.
There should be one result per line.
.Pp
If this variable is unset, use `grep -F' to search the buffer.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
If exited with "C-x C-c" or "C-u C-x C-c", then 0.
If exited with "C-x M-c", then 1.
If exited due to any error, then 1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Rs
.%B Git repository for ted
.%U https://github.com/balu/ted
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Balagopal Komarath Aq Mt bkomarath@rbgo.in
